Created "recursion" for COP 3502C (#62)
Wiki-Knights/CS-Materials: src/cs1/recursion/recursion-basics.md

---
title: Intro to Recursion
author:
    - Jacob Gadberry
---

# Introduction

Recursion is a powerful programming concept which allows programmers to develop elegant solutions to seemingly complex problems. If you've never heard of recursion before; simply, it's a function that calls itself. 

## Simple Example

Let's consider a classic example that is used to teach recursion: Factorial!

The factorial of any non-negative integer, `n`, usually written as `n!`, is defined as the product of all the positive-integers less than or equal to `n`.

> `n! = n * (n-1) * (n-2) * ... * 3 * 2 * 1`

Reviewer: Since you are working with a math equation here, maybe you want to use math notation format for this? Not vitally important, just a touch to consider. Also I may add a colon at the end of the line to connect the equation and sentence together:

```suggestion
The factorial of any non-negative integer, $n$, usually written as $n!$, is defined as the product of all the positive-integers less than or equal to $n$:

$n! = n * (n-1) * (n-2) * ... * 3 * 2 * 1$
```

Author: I've just plugged this in to play around. I really like the LaTex feel. I never considered doing this, but I think I will for the math explanations; it seems to take up less space and looks nicer (imo).

> Let's consider writing an iterative solution to this problem. This would the solution someone who hasn't encountered recursion before would probably come up with:

Reviewer: Maybe add a small explanation of "iterative solution" here? Not sure if necessary, and it doesn't have to be a very long explanation, but since this is introducing recursion, this may be good to show the contrast between them.

> Let's consider writing an iterative solution to this problem. This would the solution someone who hasn't encountered recursion before would probably come up with:

Reviewer: This sentence was a little funny when I read it, there are multiple ways to do it but this is one way I thought up for phrasing:

```suggestion
Let's consider writing an iterative solution to this problem. This would probably be the solution from someone who hasn't encountered recursion before:
```

> ``` c

Reviewer: The first indentation level in code blocks should match where the tick marks are. (This comment would really be in a linter though.)

Author: Perhaps this is a VSCode setting that is messing this up? 

Are you saying something like this?

```c
   Here is some text
```

Author: I think this might be a VSCode settings for using tabs instead of spaces, but I'm not sure yet.

> ``` c

Reviewer: Note here that `ans` is not initialized, so technically this could give an unexpected answer. (Assuming it was 1, this does work, but if it was 0 it would not.)

Author: Ahh good catch. I will make some changes to ensure there is no ambiguity.

    // Perform the product from 1 to n
    for(int i = n; i >= 1; i--){
        ans *= i;
    }
    // Display the answer
    printf("%d ",ans);
```

The key to utilizing recursive solutions to problems is answering one key question: "Can the problem I'm solving be broken into smaller sub-problems of the same type?"

> Notice for our simple Factorial program, we only do simple multiplication for each iteration `ans *= i`.

Reviewer: Maybe add some punctuation here for English prose's sake:

```suggestion
Notice for our simple Factorial program, we only do simple multiplication for each iteration: `ans *= i`.
```

## Formulating a Recursive Solution

> When creating a recursive solution we need to consider how we can create the smaller sub-problems. When computing the factorial, notice at each iteration we are simply multiplying the number we are at ,`n`, with whatever factorial of `n-1` is. 

Reviewer: Small English thing:

```suggestion
When creating a recursive solution we need to consider how we can create the smaller sub-problems. When computing the factorial, notice at each iteration we are simply multiplying the number we are at, `n`, with whatever factorial of `n-1` is. 
```

> Lets write a function body along with the logic I just described

Reviewer: Just a small suggestion for English reading on this line:

```suggestion
Let's write a function body using the logic I just described:
```

```c
int fact(int n){
    return n * factorial(n-1);
}

> ```

Reviewer: Just a small mismatch between `fact()` and `factorial()` here, either is good but should just be the same throughout the page. (This is not the only place)

## Generating a Base Case

Sweet! We are all done... or are we? There is a key piece of code that I have forgot to add. Can you figure out what it is? 

If you call `fact(5)` in `main()`, nothing will happen. This happens because an infinite loop has occurred.

Why?

Well let's trace through `fact(5)`

> > When things don't work like intended, it is always helpful to run a debugger, like GDB, which is extremely useful to show the steps your code took during execution. WikiKnights has tutorials on using GDB if you are interested.

Reviewer: When I was reading through, the block felt a little like it was in the middle of a thought with tracing. I may suggest moving it after the thought is finished. Or you could also add a label like:

```suggestion
> **Note:** When things don't work like intended, it is always helpful to run a debugger, like GDB, which is extremely useful to show the steps your code took during execution. Wiki Knights has tutorials on using GDB if you are interested.
```

Tracing the function calls: 
```
                    fact(5) = 5 * fact(4)
                    fact(4) = 4 * fact(3)
                    fact(3) = 3 * fact(2)
                    fact(2) = 2 * fact(1)
                    fact(1) = 1 * fact(0)
                            .
                            .
                            .

> ```

Reviewer: For fun, I would illustrate the fact that it goes to negatives here:

`````suggestion
```
                    fact(5) = 5 * fact(4)
                    fact(4) = 4 * fact(3)
                    fact(3) = 3 * fact(2)
                    fact(2) = 2 * fact(1)
                    fact(1) = 1 * fact(0)
                    fact(0) = 0 * fact(-1)
                    fact(-1) = -1 * fact(-2)
                            .
                            .
                            .
```
`````

> This issue highlights another key pillar of recursive solutions: base cases. A base case is a case in our recursive solution that is trivially easy to solve. Because of this, we can simply return the answer to problem, this also ensures that our recursive calls end. For Factorial this base case will be `fact(0)`, since `0! = 1`.

Reviewer: I may just add a note that 0! = 1 because it is defined:

```suggestion
This issue highlights another key pillar of recursive solutions: base cases. A base case is a case in our recursive solution that is trivially easy to solve. Because of this, we can simply return the answer to problem, this also ensures that our recursive calls end. For Factorial this base case will be `fact(0)`, since `0! = 1`, by definition.
```

> Now, lets add a base case to our code and see if it works

Reviewer: (This would be something a linter would say)

```suggestion
Now, let's add a base case to our code and see if it works:
```

```c
int fact(int n){
    //Base Case: n == 0 
    if(n == 0){
        return 1;
    }
    //Recursive Case: n > 0
    else{
        return n * fact(n-1);
    }
}
```

> 

Reviewer: What happens if you call `fact()` with a negative number? Some will argue the condition should be `if (n <= 0)` for this as a "just-in-case," even if it should never happen. Not necessary, but you could put a note here for the curious student.

## General Form of Recursive Solutions

If we analyze the structure of our recursive solution to the factorial, we will notice a few things:

```c
 //Base case
 if(terminating condition){
    //Return the trivially easy answer
 }
 //Recursive case
 else{
    //Slightly solve and recursively call the function again
 }

> ```

Reviewer: Interesting that Dr. Guha uses this structure. The other common way is:

``` c
// Base case
if (terminating condition)
{
    // Return trivially easy answer
}

// Slightly solve and recursively call the function again
```

Since the if statement is returning, everything after will only ever execute if the condition was evaluated false. Maybe throw it in for reference and exposure?

1) We have a base case condition to see if we found a trivially easy problem. This will help terminate the recursive calls (Remember what happened when we didn't have this before).
2) We have a second conditional that recursively calls the same function again but with a smaller input. Also notice how we solve the problem slightly in some sense. For our factorial this involves us multiplying `n` by `factorial(n-1)`.

While all problems might not have this simple layout, it is a good foundation to start with in your journey of learning recursion.

## Try a Problem Yourself

Given a positive integer `n`, return the sum of the digits of `n`. For example `123` would return `6` because `1 + 2 + 3 = 6`.

Given the function header, write a recursive solution to this problem.

```c
int sumDigits(int n){
    // You write this
}

> ```

Reviewer: This is completely a technicality, but the function header is just the first line without the brackets. (I only mention this since this is a learning resource for students and I would prefer the terms to be rock-solid.) Many ways to make this consistent, this is just one:

```suggestion
Given the following function, write a recursive solution to this problem.

```c
int sumDigits(int n){
    // You write this
}
```
```

## Conclusion

As we've learned, recursion is an incredibly powerful programming technique that can be used to solve many different types of problems. Understanding and utilizing recursion is a skill, which implies some practice is needed to hone.  Recursion is also an important programming concept that integral to many different data structures and algorithms you will cover in Computer Science I. Because of this, it is important to take the time to practice utilizing recursion in different types of problems.

## Additional Resources

> [William Fiset Recursion Playlist](https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLDV1Zeh2NRsCmu1lb9grUcljeYJtmgmYc&si=ZCzm6PNRa7iZw1bV)

Reviewer: Maaaybeeee take out the analytics ID in the YouTube link?

```suggestion
[William Fiset Recursion Playlist](https://youtube.com/playlist?list=PLDV1Zeh2NRsCmu1lb9grUcljeYJtmgmYc)
```

Author: Just another things I didn't realize, my bad. Once we decide on what links to include, then I will make some more changes.

[Introduction to Recursion](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/introduction-to-recursion-data-structure-and-algorithm-tutorials/)

> [5 Simple Steps for Solving Any Recursive Problem](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ngCos392W4w)

Reviewer: I really like this video's visual style! 3Blue1Brown's graphics library is killer.

Author: When linking things like videos, articles, etc., should we just put the title of the media we are linking? Or should we add some additional info like "Creator X's video "(insert video title)".
